So this is the question I get asked a lot
because people here aren't familiar with
web assembly be like, cool cool cool.
Web assembly, why do we need web assembly?
Is it java script?
And I am like well no,
it's not JavaScript.
Can I use on JavaScript?
Absolutely.
You're supposed to, you have to.
Is it going to replace JavaScript?
No, it is not a replacement for
JavaScript.
Web assembly is designed to
work in tandem with JavaScript.
It's an entirely different language
running an entirely different
process in the browser.
The main point of confusion that people
get is should I use web assembly or
a web worker?
And again,
those are two different concepts.
They're both different processes
running in the browser.
But web assembly is its own environment
its sandbox is memory safe.
And the main point of web
assembly is that other engineers
can write code that runs on browser.
And this is the part that always gets me
it's kind of a misnomer because people say
we're suddenly like, yeah, it must
be something in front engineers do.
And actually,
from the people I've talked to you all the
blog posts I've read the talks I've seen,
most of the people writing web
assembly are not front end engineers.
They are people that write C.
They're people to write rust or C++ or
I don't know if C sharp compiles yet.
I'll look that up.
But there are people that aren't
necessarily enamored with the front end
like like, we are in front of masters.
There are people that they want to do
video processing image processing games,
because web assembly
works with binary data.
That is super low level ones and
zeros and you're moving them around,
which is why we're gonna spend quite
a bit of time on the foundational work.
But really the advantages of
web assembly are, it's fast.
And I know you're thinking,
is it faster than JavaScript?
It depends.
That's not really the use case and I'm
sure lots of people on Twitter are gonna
get inflames, and they're gonna get
really angry about saying that.
But it really depends on the use case on
whether or not you should use web assembly
or JavaScript for particular for
solving a particular problem.
By the end of this course I hope and
we will understand that the use case for
web assembly versus JavaScript and
when to actually take on the complexity
of dealing with web assembly.
Well, actually, I think I can do
this in JavaScript and a web worker.
More advantages of web assembly in
general, I've already said it, you can
take a high level language like rust or
C, it compiles down to web assembly.
It runs on more than just browsers.
Right now,
there's not a really broad use case for
writing desktop apps with web assembly,
but that's coming in the future.
The whole reason why web assembly
exists is to have a portable,
memory safe, consistent environment,
to write a language.
And if you're thinking, Well,
that sounds a lot like the old days,
like where we wrote desktop apps,
and then we ship them constantly.
And the idea is the same.
The power of a desktop app is that
it runs natively on a computer.
So this is going to be my first most
controversial point of the day is.
No matter what you write,
a JavaScript is never going to be as
fast as a native desktop application.
That's because a native application
written in C sharp or Java or
anything like that is always
going to use the low level
memory instructions of
the computer that it's on.
So if it's using Windows or
Linux or an arm system or
an x86 system, a desktop application
can take advantage of that because it
can reach down into low level instruction
code and just be more efficient.
Whereas JavaScript no matter what
Always has to be interpreted first and
then compiled.
And so you're always going to get this
idea that it's running in a sandbox
environment.
So it's never gonna be as fast,
versus now we can write web assembly,
we can get that sort
of speed in a browser.
And then we can take that code and
move it to a Linux machine or
Windows machine and
run it natively on the desktop.
That's pretty cool.
That's so cool.
Alright, but mainly I'm trying to set
context here and it's not a silver bullet,
it's not gonna solve all of your
performance issues or things like that.
That's not what web assembly is for.
It's for this portability and the ability
to take complex programs that you've
already written in C,
like a video encoder or decoder, and then
bring them to the web and then use that
power in a safe, memory efficient manner.
Okay, that was a lot.
Are there any questions so
far on web assembly because I
talked at a super high level.
And I really wanna make sure we
understand what we're doing here today.
And what we're going to get out of it.
>> Is a question about comparing
it to Java has byte code
what it compiles versus web assembly
like how are they different?
>> They-
>> Are there similarities.
>> There are similarities because Java and
I want to say Python also compiles
down to bytecode or some form of it.
There's similarities there but
web assembly ultimately is going
to compile down to assembly it is.
It's not the lowest level of programming
that would be assembly language itself.
That's as low as we can get,
we can't write ones and zeros.
I haven't met a human who can do that I'm
sure there's like one person on the planet
who can like I can code in ones and zeros.
I don't know how, but the lowest level
of programming we can get is assembly.
And then right above that is web assembly.
So hence the name web assembly.
Now Java is still going to compile to, or
Python is still doing part of
bytecode which has to compile down
again into assembly instructions,
and then it runs natively.
So, in terms of performance,
I would say Java is still gonna be faster,
not not due to anything like input or
architecture or how it's written.
It's just the more mature platform.
There are more optimizations in the Pilar.
There are more tips and tricks we know for
optimizing all that code.
Web assembly is the newest
kid on the block.
It's been around for a few years, but
it really gained popularity once all the
browser's decided that this was the thing.
We're gonna adopt it and
let's make it work for everybody.
And for the most part for something kind
of relatively unknown in the front end
land every browser supports web assembly,
that's one of the reasons why I'm
making this course is because we just
don't really know that it's for engineers.
And if you look at some web assembly code,
it's really intimidating because it
doesn't look anything like
programming that we know.
And it makes you think like, hey,
this isn't some JavaScript, this
is even a language that I'm even familiar
with and a syntax that I'm familiar with.
And that's why I wrote this course
because as we go on in the future,
we will definitely see more web assembly
and I want people to be familiar with it.
This is exactly what I say in my full
stack course, in that you're not gonna
learn everything about full stack or
servers or things like that.
It's more when you see it again,
you'll be familiar and
if it's an area you're interested in,
well,
maybe I can change your career path
into being a web assembly programmer.
I really believe this is the forefront
of the next stage of the internet,
which, yeah, I'll talk more about that and
my passionate and all that.
Are any other questions?
I love that what about Java and bytecode.
The question was,
is web assembly similar to programming in
assembly itself as an x86 instructions or
arm or
whatever micro architecture of
the system they programming on?
The answer is yes and no.
Yes, in that the principles are the same
we're actually just taking bits and
we're moving them around.
We're applying low level instructions
called opcodes to all of these bits.
But it's a step above assembly and
that we have nice things like four loops,
and dealing with arrays, and
if statements that aren't completely
ridiculous to read, so
I'd say it's somewhere in the middle.
It's definitely more approachable
than trying to learn assembly.
And that's really the goal of this course
is to make it approachable make it
understandable for everybody.
But yeah, I'll do some comparisons
to assembly a bit later.
But for now think of it as the middle
ground between assembly and
a high level language.
>> I was just wondering.
So that means we can actually rethink the
way we shipped like for example packages
can we just swipe packages in web
assembly and then they can actually.
I mean, the consumer can compose those
packages they could do when shipping.
>> Yes, thank you.
Yeah, you're already there.
You're already that's why
we wanna think about this.
Yes, what we, the power we get
right now is the ability to take,
let's say a video decoder.
It's written in C, which is a time tested,
very old language.
Very efficient.
We can compile that to web assembly and we
take all those efficiencies we got from C.
And then we run them as we
run those in the browser.
So yes, that's what it's designed
to do is to create packages of
really complex imputing and
then bring that to the browser.
Whereas if we try to do this in
JavaScript, it would be very clunky and
very onerous.
JavaScript isn't really designed
to work at a low level,
the way that we would need to be as
optimal and as efficient as possible.
You're asking about,
if we just like imported
the cool secret library?
When we import that web assembly,
is it going to be a pain to debug?
And the answer is, yes, it is,
that debugging story on web assembly is
probably not as strong as other
languages that we have right now.
Because again, this isn't as
mature as even JavaScript where we
have amazing debugging school skills.
So, if you were at the end of this
course if you say hey I have my favorite
image decoder, audio processing
library that I want to pull in.
You really do still have to know what
you're doing because it can quickly go
off the rails I'll say when we tackle
memory later which I save memory till
pretty far down the course because
it's a really complicated topic and
it's cognitively it's difficult for
a lot of engineers to understand.
But you have to understand
exactly what's going on.
Because we're going to see sine shifting,
like literally we're moving bits here and
there and we're moving from a 16 bit
Integer to an unsigned eight bit integer.
And you really have to understand
that stuff at a low level.
So I wouldn't say go out and pour your
favorite library to web assembly just yet.
However, there are many examples of
people have done that so far and
there are some links at the end where we
see made with web assembly where people
have ported rust and
other high level programs into it.
But yes, to answer that,
that's a long way to answer your question.
You can.
It's a little tricky though.
There's the question in the chat was,
can we reuse things like fetch and
other browser API's or
do we have to rewrite them from scratch?
The answer is yes, we will use fetch.
We will use some browser API's.
But the surface area is pretty minimal.
And it's gonna come down to
moving memory back and forth and
the tooling that we're going to use later
built by using assembly scripts and
things like binary and things like that.
But good question we will get there.